0089

Las reglas para la escritura de números romanos permiten muchas formas de
escribir cada número (ver FAQ: Números Romanos). Sin embargo, siempre existe
una manera óptima de escribir un número en particular.

Por ejemplo, lo siguiente representa todas las formas correctas de escribir el
número dieciséis:

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII VIIIIIIIIIII VVIIIIII XIIIIII VVVI XVI

El último ejemplo se considera el más eficaz, ya que utiliza la menor cantidad
de números.

El archivo de texto de 11K, roman.txt (clic derecho y "Guardar enlace/destino
como..."), contiene mil números romanos escritos de manera válida, pero no
necesariamente mínima; es decir, las unidades se organizan en orden descendente
y obedecen la notación substractiva (ver FAQ para las reglas a aplicar en este
problema).

Halla el número de caracteres ahorrados al escribir cada uno de estos números
en su forma mínima.

Nota: Puedes asumir que todos los números romanos del archivo no contienen más
de cuatro unidades idénticas consecutivas.




FAQ

How do you read and write Roman numerals?

Traditional Roman numerals are made up of the following denominations:

I = 1 V = 5 X = 10 L = 50 C = 100 D = 500 M = 1000

You will read about many different rules concerning Roman numerals, but the
truth is that the Romans only had one simple rule:

Numerals must be arranged in descending order of size.

For example, three ways that sixteen could be written are XVI, XIIIIII, VVVI;
the first being the preferred form as it uses the least number of numerals.

The "descending size" rule was introduced to allow the use of subtractive
combinations. For example, four can be written IV because it is one before
five. As the rule requires that the numerals be arranged in order of size it
should be clear to a reader that the presence of a smaller numeral out of
place, so to speak, was unambiguously to be subtracted from the following
numeral. For example, nineteen could be written XIX = X + IX (9). Note also how
the rule requires X (ten) be placed before IX (nine), and IXX would not be an
acceptable configuration.

Generally the Romans tried to use as few numerals as possible when displaying
numbers. For this reason, XIX would be the preferred form of nineteen over
other valid combinations, like XVIIII or XVIV. However, this was NOT a rule and
there still remain in Rome many examples where economy of numerals has not been
employed. For example, in the famous Colesseum the the numerals above the
forty-ninth entrance is written XXXXVIIII and not IL nor XLIX (see rules
below).

Despite this, over time we have continued to introduce new restrictive rules.
By mediaeval times it had become standard practice to avoid more than three
consecutive identical numerals. That is, IV would be written instead of IIII,
IX would be used instead of VIIII, and so on. In addition, the subtractive
combinations had the following rules superimposed:

Only I, X, and C can be used as the leading numeral in part of a subtractive
pair.  I can only be placed before V and X.  X can only be placed before L and
C.  C can only be placed before D and M.  These last four rules are considered
to be law, and generally it is preferred, but not necessary, to display numbers
using the minimum number of numerals. Which means that IL is considered an
invalid way of writing forty-nine, and whereas XXXXVIIII, XXXXIX, XLVIIII, and
XLIX are all quite legitimate, the latter is the preferred (minimal) form.

It is also expected that higher denominations should be used whenever possible;
for example, L should be used in place of XXXXX, or C should be used in place
of LL. However, even this "rule" has been flaunted: in the church of
Sant'Agnese fuori le Mura (St Agnes' outside the walls), found in Rome, the
date, MCCCCCCVI (1606), is written on the gilded and coffered wooden ceiling;
I am sure that many would argue that it should have been written MDCVI.

However, if we believe the adage, "when in Rome do as the Romans do," and we
see how the Romans write numerals, then it clearly gives us much more freedom
than many would care to admit.





- Como regla general, los símbolos se escriben y leen de izquierda a derecha,
  de mayor a menor valor.
- El valor de un número se obtiene sumando los valores de los símbolos que lo
  componen, salvo en la siguiente excepción.
- Si un símbolo de tipo 1 está a la izquierda inmediata de otro de mayor valor,
  se resta al valor del segundo el valor del primero. Ej. IV=4, IX=9.
- Los símbolos de tipo 5 siempre suman y no pueden estar a la izquierda de uno
  de mayor valor.
- Se permiten a lo sumo tres repeticiones consecutivas del mismo símbolo de
  tipo 1.
- No se permite la repetición de una misma letra de tipo 5, su duplicado es una
  letra de tipo 10.
- Si un símbolo de tipo 1 aparece restando, sólo puede aparecer a su derecha un
  sólo símbolo de mayor valor.
- Si un símbolo de tipo 1 que aparece restando se repite, sólo se permite que
  su repetición esté colocada a su derecha y que no sea adyacente al símbolo
  que resta.
- Sólo se admite la resta de un símbolo de tipo 1 sobre el inmediato mayor de
  tipo 1 o de tipo 5. Ejemplos:
- el símbolo I sólo puede restar a V y a X.
- el símbolo X sólo resta a L y a C.
- el símbolo C sólo resta a D y a M.
- Se permite que dos símbolos distintos aparezcan restando si no son
  adyacentes.

